I'm talking to Chef Louis Zatmari.
That's how we pronounce it, right?
Wonderful.
Zatmari.
And you say everything in this, we're in a warehouse.
It's a cavernous warehouse in Providence, Rhode Island.
About 18,000 square feet.
There's a long row of wooden columns.
And apparently, is this the temporary location of the university archives?
Johnston and Wales University, which is, as you have said, you told me on the phone, is about ready to burst forth for international recognition, in a sense.
It's not only being burst forth.
We have stood out from 61 nations from around the room.
I think he was speaking.
It's the largest school of Skype.
But I think you were talking in terms of special collections.
Oh, yes, that's correct.
It was ready to emerge.
That's correct.
This collection is moving slowly but surely into another building where it will have a final destiny.
Could you briefly tell me what is in this room?
A mass.
Well, I mean, what specifically... Okay, I have here a brochure, but we can give you a copy.
Oh, you have a brochure.
Yes, it will.
And we have here what we believe is perhaps the world's largest collection of culinary and travel and food-related material.
We speak of material.
It's books, but it's all sorts of items.
Well, it's not only books.
It is books, manuscripts, pamphlets, postcards, trade catalogs, mail order catalogs.
You have all these in the brochure.
You will get it.
18,000 postcards.
18,000.
On hotels, motels, restaurants, and related items.
Where did you get all of these things?
We'll get to that at some point.
Now, these items here that I'm looking at, these items, right?
Of course, everything.
Everything here is yours.
That's right.
But I think— So this collection didn't really exist prior to your request.
Is that—is that in love, right?
No, no.
It was absolutely zero, nothing.
The university had a—had and has a fabulous book collection.
Oh, this university, yes.
The so-called Paul Fritchie Collection.
Mm-hmm.
And I think I—
I should suggest to you that you look into it.
Mr. Fritchie is dead, but you could talk to his widow.
He was a fabulous, fabulous collector.
Of culinary books?
Cookbooks, culinary books, mainly cookbooks, and it is so interesting how through, not the years, but the decades, we bid
against each other on auction so we both could give to this school.
We both bid against each other.
Not knowing.
That when we will get a wood, we both will donate to the same school.
That's a great story.
How did he spell his name?
Fritchi.
You will get all the documentation we are prepared to give you on.
Oh, that's wonderful.
That makes it a lot easier for me.
Well, we know that our time is money, and we assume that your time is money, too.
That's right.
But you knew this man?
Was he a chef?
Was he a restaurateur, or was he an entrepreneur who collected culinary books?
He was an entrepreneur, a very wealthy man, a very elegant man who collected cookbooks.
From where?
Where was he from?
He was from Rhode Island, but he lived in California.
And when he collected the books, the school did not exist.
When I collected the books, the school did not exist.
But the school had a president who had a dream that someday he will have the largest collection.
He didn't know how.
Really?
Yeah.
You opened your restaurant in 1961, I gather.
62.
I know something of your background, so I won't...
We won't have to go through a lot of the essentials.
You could because it's better if you get from the horses smart than from the horses half.
As long as you don't mind.
No.
I have all night and then... No, but we are going out to eat.
We are taking our dinner reservation for you with you.
And then we come back here.
Okay.
And when we come back, will you mind if I take a few photographs?
I've got a camera on.
No, no, no.
Because I love this stuff in situ, as we say.
Yes.
Now, the very interesting thing, you've got all my bookshelves.
These are your bookshelves?
Every one of the bookshelves all over.
And then you go, you don't see full over your chair.
Okay.
Look in here.
Oh, boy.
That's also all mine.
And all around that wall.
The bookshelves.
Where did you keep this?
Where did you keep all of this material?
Okay.
I owned and operated a small restaurant with 117 chairs.
Really, the small U.S.
restaurant is 135 chairs, so I was a little smaller than the small restaurant.
But upstairs I had 17 apartments, 31 rooms for my books.
But you kept all the rooms for yourself.
You didn't rent any of the rooms.
I campaigned for the books, not for myself.
I didn't live there.
I'm wondering, I mean, did you know the whole collection?
Did you have a sense of what you had?
Now, I understand 24,000 books went to Iowa.
Yes, 22,000.
And we have X thousand of items here, perhaps 40,000 items altogether, 40,000 or 50,000 items.
The Hungarian collection is how large?
About 15,000 girls right now, these days, as we are talking here, is going to University of Chicago, Regenstein Library.
Okay, I'm going there, by the way.
I'm going to Chicago next month.
Yes, I will be there.
And maybe we'll see each other again.
Of course, yes, sure.
Because I'm going to the University of Chicago, and I'm going to the Newbury, and I'm going to the Career Army, see Sam Rosenthal.
You know Sam?
He's the lawyer, the gentleman in his 90s, and he's a collector.
I was just thinking of Bob Rosenthal, who was my dear friend and who was the curator of rare books at University of Chicago, and just died.
Young man.
My question, I guess, is, did you have a sense of what you had?
Were you a collector with the idea that you were acquiring a vast volume of things?
Okay.
Did you know what you had?
I do really have to go back.
I want you to stand anywhere you want.
My great-grandfather, whose name was Stephen Sottmary.
Stephen?
Sottmary.
With a V or a PH.
PH.
Okay.
He was a great and well-known book collector.
Barbara
Did you send him these?
No, nothing.
I had no chance yet to send anything.
You can give everything.
Oh, this is very, very important.
I'm going to ask you to inscribe this.
Sure.
This is from our collection here.
but you can feel that.
Talking about Stephen Zatmari.
Yes.
And this was where, in Hungary?
It was Hungary, in Transylvania.
Actually, it was in a part, what was called the Partsiu, which was between Hungary and Transylvania.
How do we spell Krasin?
D-A-R-D-I-U-F.
He lived there, and he was
A very interesting person, he was, what should I say, a landowner or a farmer or a, you know, a farmer of Sagranthal, I guess, landowner or whatever you call it, who was buying books because he collected books.
He was interested in the classics.
And he was, you know, in the old times, the fine, great book dealers of the world always had a tiny sticker in the back of the book on the binding or the inside of the binding.
So when I was a child and I looked at books and I listened to my grandfather, who was a great collector,
And to my father, who was not such a great boy, because he lost one leg in the First World War, and we had to leave our home.
And I was born on a cattle train.
My mother said if I would be born at home, I would be born on the new wing.
of our home, and the new wing was built before Columbus came here, but that's not the new wing, because it was newer than the old.
We lived at the same place for 700 years, because we had no money to move, you know.
Because that time, in that part of the world, just like in Greece, which is just on the other side of the same mountains, mountain range,
People kind of didn't move.
Why would they?
They owned the mountain, they owned the road, they owned the building.
Why should they move?
Somebody moved and they married somebody in another place, so they had to edit.
So I always sought his names of the book dealers.
You always sought his name?
The names of the book dealers in the books.
I never saw my great-grandfather.
He died before I was born, but I always saw his picture.
He looked like Moshe Dayan, with one eye.
Because when he had the big freedom fight in 1851, the fight was... Thank you very much.
Thank you, buddy.
And, you know, the other one, the...
No, he has nothing, nothing.
I don't have the books in Iowa.
That's all right.
I'll take care of that.
Oh, okay.
This is wonderful.
All right, okay.
And, you know, do you have any of that collector magazine with the
Where I sit with the... Matt?
I got one if I unpack those five.
Don't unpack.
It's time, really.
We'll talk and I'll call you.
So the best is if we go right now, don't you think so?
What time is our reservation?
We made a very early reservation.
I'll call if we're ready.
I told him I'd call.
Check.
Yes.
It's just five right now.
Yeah.
We are going to a very good...
owned and operated and run by this group.
Oh, very nice.
So I was born among books.
You were born among books.
And I grew up among books and among very bookish people.
And I remember as a kid and as a young man, then we went on trips with my grandfather
We always ended in box doors, wherever we went.
Now, my grandfather was a railroad man.
That's my father's father.
And when he retired, just like all the European railroads, the Hungarian Railroad, was owned and operated by the Kingdom of Hungary, the Royal Hungarian Railroad.
And we had the Austrian Railroad and the Greek Royal Railroad.
the Greek Railroad, and the Serbian Railroad, and the Polish Railroad.
And all these state-owned and run railroads had a reciprocal agreement that the top guys, when we retired, they could travel first class with one person accompanying me throughout the other railroads of Europe.
So, you know, maybe not wealthy, but we could take a great advantage of this.
We were three brothers.
And my grandfather would get on the train in Budapest.
And he and I went to Paris on the railroad station.
We went upstairs and he introduced me to the...
people there and we had rooms of eight beds and a big laguar with a big pitcher of cold water and we could stay there.
I could sleep in one of the beds.
And my grandfather took the train back to Budapest and brought my brother out who was twenty months younger than I.
And when he arrived with my younger brother, then we traveled around in France.
We just thought to pay for one person a few pennies for my kid brother.
Many times when we went to the train station and we said, we have to, we said, you know, because he was hoping that when he will go to Budapest with his second child, he will say, what?
And he would have to pay a few pennies.
First of all, travel was cheap.
Second, this was really cut rate, because my grandfather had a red pass, which was good for all the railroads, for two people, for no pay.
So even if he would have to pay the total first pass for the third person,
That's how you traveled and you did, you say you always went to bookstories.
We traveled, we went to bookstories.
So when I went with Barbara and Magda and with my two nieces, two Mike's brothers in London, then we— Maggie, that's the time for my M-A-G-G-S, and that's my typist.
Oh, great.
Excellent.
I went with Barbie and Baba, my wife, to Max Brothers.
Then we showed the children their great-great-grandfather's orders from 1804 to 1805.
I told you this, so you see that, you see, when I was growing up,
I know that W.A.
Heck in Vienna, and, uh, uh, Edwards on Maryle Bowl Lane in London, and, uh, Israel in Amsterdam, and Rappaport in Rome are the Coke stores.
The Reds in Paris, I suppose.
Yes, yes.
So, you know, uh,
When I started to collect, I just wrote very polite short letters to these people that I am the son of Luis Satmari, the grandson of Luis Satmari, and the great-grandson of Stephen Satmari, and I collect agrarica just like my forebears, and I also collect
What did your forebears collect?
Hungarica?
We collected classics, and we collected books that had to do with Hungarians, one way or the other, what is called in the trade, Hungarica.
Books written on Hungarians, written by Hungarians, or Latin books translated by Hungarians, or medieval books.
You know, in the 1400s we had famous Hungarian church authors who authored books of sermons which had been printed before 1500 in eleven, twelve cities, the same books.
That's right.
So, you know, these are.
And then my grandfather collected beside this lots of
books of natural history.
He was very much interested.
And what happened to his collection?
Did he disperse it?
Did you get any of it?
How old are you?
How old am I?
47.
47?
Yeah.
So you've been born in 1943.
Oh, yeah, we had, in 43, we had about 40,000 books in our library.
And then came something, what was called the end of the Second World War, and not too much left.
Were they destroyed or stolen?
Destroyed and stolen.
Both.
Just gone, yeah.
Of course, you spent time in prison camps, so the least of you worries was books.
No, no, but you see, we had the type of attitude, because we just simply had to.
We've been forced by history and by nature to have the attitude then.
and we looked up in another mirror, and we tried to look for an eye in the back of our head.
You tried to look for an eye in the back of your head?
And because we couldn't find any, we felt if God would want us to keep looking back, we would at least have one eye in the back.
But because both of our eyes are not looking to the side or to the back, but from, that's the message that we should
look forward, not backward.
We really learned to write down what was gone, you know, and instead of crying on what we lost, we learned what to do to get something for the future.
Now, you came here about 1951, I think.
I came in 1951.
I had one dollar and ten cents.
I had fourteen books.
I'm sorry, ten cents, you said?
One dollar and ten cents.
One dollar and ten cents, and fourteen books.
Yes.
Do you remember what those fourteen books were?
I had a list of fourteen books.
Are they still part of your archives?
They are in my home, yeah.
So those you still have?
Oh, yes, yes.
For those who haven't gone to Iowa.
No, no, please.
No, no, no.
No, I mean, that's a significant question.
Yeah, now, you see, I have an agreement with the University of Chicago that I have the right, I gave my entire Hungarian collection, but I have the right to keep up until my, quote, the miss, unquote.
That's D-D-M-I-S-E.
As many books as I want.
You know, so probably a couple hundred books I will keep.
These are very special books.
Yeah, for some reason special to me.
Just tell me what we're looking at.
Okay.
These are graters and grinders.
This is like a nutcracker.
That's for cherries.
A lot of these are what we call food choppers.
You can make salads or ground meats or sausages.
That's a dual cherry pitter.
It pits two cherries at once.
That's for poppy seeds.
And then we have spice mills and coffee grinders down on the bottom.
Do these have any archival interest to you, or are they more curiosities?
They do, because you see there's spinoffs to our book collection.
This is an example of the...
Enterprise, Philadelphia, 1897.
This is titled The Enterprising Housekeeper, 1897, by Helen Louise Johnson.
This was sold for 50 cents, so we can not only show you what the gadget looks like, but we have the paper background with recipes that come with it.
What Barbara is showing me here is a lithographic illustration on the cover, and part of that illustration shows one of these blinders that she was just
pointing out to me.
And this is for juice.
And if you want to make tomato juice, they had special ones that made juice, others that made the... And here's another one, the Universal Food Chapter.
Now, the Universal is still sold today in delicatessens and grocery stores.
In a hundred years, the design hasn't changed.
It's the same.
That is my sweater.
I hung it up on a chair.
It's 25 cents.
That's a lot of money for a hundred years ago.
Right.
So we consider these books, and so what we try to do is either first we get the gadget, and then we look for the book, or we have the book and we look for the gadget.
So we have either one of those.
You know, I laughed when you were talking about.
I think the last thing we were talking about, I was looking at all these massive items in the warehouse.
And the first thing you said to me when we talked on the phone, you said, are you an MD?
You asked me if I was a physician.
Yes.
And I was confused, but then you said, well, you know, we collectors are sick people.
Yeah.
And then I said, well, you know, the title of my book is A Gentle Madness, because it's not a sickness, but it certainly is an aberration of some sort.
Oh, yes, it is.
Definitely, yes.
Tell me a little bit about, you mentioned that you come from a long line of collectors.
Yes.
That's an inherited madness.
Some people would say it's not, but then again, you know, I think it's cultivated.
Otherwise, why would so many people sell off their, you know, when Bradley Martin died, you know, his family sold off his library.
It seems that collections, more often than not, do not pass on to the next generation.
In your case, I have to believe it is because it was cultivated.
You know, because of the nature of your book, and because I'm 72 years old, and I did spend all the time since you've been born in this mad field, I tell you a few very interesting things that I learned along the road.
When J.P.
Morgan invited once hundred of his friends to his yacht for a dinner on the yacht, one of the guests said to him, J.P., how much it costs to own a yacht like this?
And he said, darling, if you have to know how much it costs, you can't afford it.
You know why he had the yacht?
What he really would want to have was a great library, but he couldn't afford it.
So he settled for the yacht.
But he had a great library.
Not for himself.
not for himself.
He had a great library for the nation.
But he enjoyed it, his son gave it, but I see your point here.
The point is that the most expensive madness.
Usually the suns sell off,
the inheritors sell off the library.
It is an interesting thing what you say that the inheritors sell off.
It's psychologically understandable because they are jealous of the library.
Sibling jealousy.
Father spends too much cutting time with the books.
Father spends too much time on the books.
Father spends all his money on the books.
Father is always with the books.
Father wouldn't let us touch the books.
So you know, how can we take revenge?
Sad and hard books.
You see this?
In the old time, in the time when my forebears and the other collectors forebears collected books, the bedroom was not full of books from the floor to the ceiling.
The books were in the library.
They had their place.
And because
They've been in the library.
They've been part of the household, not intruders.
I've been in homes where the dining room couldn't be used for the last 17 years because it was full with the books.
You know, at the guest bedroom, you couldn't get to the guest bed because it was full of the...
Who are some of these people?
Can you tell me?
All kinds of people.
But these are the people whose children they sell the books.
You came to this country with 14 books.
Yes.
And you still have these books.
I still have all 14.
And you got to Chicago, I guess, you were here in the East Coast for a while.
You mentioned to me that you spent some time in Worcester, as a matter of fact, you were teaching there.
You were in Connecticut.
You're an educator, and you spent some time teaching, and you started your restaurant, which was a tremendous success, which earned a great reputation.
I'm giving a little summary here from what I know.
Okay, I'm sorry.
I'm just giving a brief recitation of what I know of your background.
Your restaurant was celebrated by everyone who has visited it.
I regret that I...
I've never had a chance to... I really don't expect that much time in Chicago.
But my point is, I wonder at what point did you start becoming a collector?
A hopeless collector who acquired thousands upon thousands of books and postcards and manuscripts and devices and presidential letters and Hungarian items.
There seems to have been no limit to your appetite for these items.
Maybe you can just give me some insight and start anywhere you'd like and just talk and... The first time I went to New York, with the small remains of my first paycheck, I went to the Marlborough bookstore in the corner of 42nd Street and Broadway.
and I bought for 19 cents Ludwig Bammelmann's book whose name I know because a friend who came a year ahead of me to the United States took me to Ludwig Bammelmann's restaurant in New York
Thank you.
I just wanted to clarify the salmon.
You just wanted a salmon appetizer?
The cold smoked salmon appetizer with the capers and lemon and chocolate.
I just wanted to make sure.
Thank you.
Ludwig Bommelman.
He was a restaurateur.
And writer.
Very successful writer.
Most of his pieces appeared in the New Yorker magazine.
And then he collected them into books.
So, what kind of a book was this?
This was a cookbook that you bought?
No, it was a part of his life.
He wrote several books about himself.
Very interesting, lovely books.
Now, did you already own your restaurant on this trip?
Oh, no.
That was when I got my first paycheck when I arrived here.
Started to live.
Had you decided at that point that you would be involved in the food business?
Yes.
And I also... You see, the thing is this.
I started to collect books when I was a kid.
I just didn't call it collecting.
I just was buying books.
My favorite pastime was reading.
as a kid buy ebooks
From the first time you arrived here?
Yes.
At some point, however, you're collecting with focus and with purpose, and to harken back to the J.P.
Morgan story.
You're spending a lot of money.
Would you like to?
What I learned in America was that it is true that time is money.
and when I was young and poor and worked on not high paying jobs I had lots of time so I could spend the whole day in a Salvation Army basement with the books and after
sitting there for six, seven hours.
I came out with three books for five cents each.
Later on, when I had very good jobs and I was highly paid, I couldn't spend five or eight hours in a bookstore.
But I went to work
After I left my job, in the evening I took a second job.
Hello, how are you?
I worked very hard, and in five minutes I spent that money on books.
Did you take these books home and read them right away?
Have you ever bought books that you haven't read?
Yes.
Tell me about that.
What prompts you to do something like that?
I guess I'm trying to get into the personality and the psyche of the collection.
I'm really trying to establish, you know, there's no question that you're a discriminating and appreciative reader.
Yes, but you see, the thing is, what's your religion?
Yeah, right.
What's your religion?
I'm sorry?
What is your religion?
I'm a Greek Orthodox.
Are you familiar with the Bible?
To a degree.
Did you ever heard about King Solomon?
Of course.
You know that he had 700 wives and 300 concubines?
I don't know.
I don't think he would have any... 1,000 wives he had.
I don't know if he read me.
You know what I mean?
I don't respect the question.
Okay.
So...
When you bet on the horse race, you bet for win, for place, for show.
When you buy books, you buy some books to read, some buy books to own, and some books for reference.
I agree 100%.
You want to possess
the books.
You want to own them.
And that's what makes the difference.
Perhaps you buy every book with the hope that you will read it.
And I would say that most of the books I bought, I know pretty much what is in them.
Even if I didn't read it.
Well, you knew what you were buying, in other words.
Yes.
You knew the importance of what you were buying.
Almost all the time, not all the time.
Well, Winston Churchill said,
He said it's not important for a gentleman, and regrettably, book collectors traditionally have men and very few women, and there are all kinds of reasons and studies for that.
But he said it's very important for a gentleman.
It's not important that a gentleman read every book in his library.
What is important is that he knows what he has,
and where he can find it and how it can help him when he needs to know that.
Get me a little sugar.
Sugar?
Sure.
Absolutely.
What do I have and how can it help me when I need it?
You know, I've got 10 or 15,000.
That's where it is.
I've got 10 or 15,000 books at home.
What books you cook?
I'll shut this up.
I don't know what the... Thank you.
I don't know if you put a monetary value on your collection.
It's not really relevant to me.
I'm sure you know what you put into it and you know what it's worth.
You have some idea what it might command on the Sotheby's or Christie's, but you've seen fit to give it, to put it in good hands and pass it on.
This is correct, is it not?
It is, absolutely.
But I'm putting words in there about it.
No, no, no.
You know what you are talking about.
The thing, the very interesting thing, that several people, when they heard that I gave the books here, they said, ah, talks writer.
You don't realize that a person like me could not, under any circumstances, earn enough money to deduct a donation like this.
Well, it's not a tax write-off anymore anyway.
No, because, you know, it is a ridiculously small amount.
Would you like some of this?
Thank you.
And yes, you do.
You go through the motions.
Why?
Because the school needs it for insurance purposes.
You know?
Right.
And you need it for yourself, for your records.
Well, no, you see, one reason that this is now a new era for the book collector, for a while there, the institutions were getting all the good stuff, but the government wrote off that book, closed that book, so now it behooves the collector to sell his stuff as opposed to giving it to institutions.
So really, anyone who suggests that you're doing this for tax write-off is not aware of what's happened in the world of rare books in the last 10 or 15 years.
That's right.
You stand to gain nothing by giving these things away.
I know that.
You don't have to explain this to me.
So there has to be a higher purpose, a higher motivation for you to do what you're doing.
And I'd kind of like you to articulate that a little bit for me.
I was on a track with you I think about the decision at what point to
you know, give up your, it's almost like sending your children off into the wilderness, you know, to send your books off to these institutions.
Well, I was about 20 years old when I first thought
of myself was collecting books, not buying books or collecting books.
And somehow, although I lost all what I get together during the second book... These are things that you collected in... Yes, in harmony.
And then I collected books in...
Austria where I lived seven years after the war and I had to kiss goodbye to them because I had no money and no way to get the books out except my tongue.
And as I told you, I came with one dollar ten cents.
Okay, one dollar ten cents and fourteen books, and I don't mean to interrupt.
Yeah.
But you made a selection, you picked fourteen books from what you had.
There was, I really loved it.
Tell me a little bit about that.
How did you pick these 14?
Probably at that time, I had 200 books.
And I thought, I'd definitely take my Bible.
And it's a Bible, there's nothing, it's not a... What I get was a child.
I received it as a child and I hunted my boy with me as a soldier through the war.
Then I had three books of Mozart.
that I bought in Salzburg.
Then I had great Hungarian poets, poetry books, two that I had since my childhood and my mother sent them after me.
and fear for what I bought after the war from other immigrants in Austin.
And that was pretty much what I had to do.
And I felt, these are the books, what I would want, the greatest Algerian poets.
Let's see.
I mean, I have poetry books, but the whole Hungarian nation agreed that these are the greatest poems.
And I have some books of poetry, but I felt these are the greatest poems.
please help yourself would you like another glass
So, I still have these 40 books.
Did it hurt you to leave any books behind?
Very badly.
Did you decide that the number was 40?
No, no, no.
I had so much room there.
Yes, that's all right.
We will bring us as much as we need.
You know, I think this is so thick water, so basic.
Sorry.
No, come on.
This is Africa.
This is just so good.
Then one of the guests who used to eat at the bakery said to me, listen, this is one which is just a little bit larger and it stops when you stop to speak and it starts with a voice.
activated and it is marvelous.
I hope this has never touched it yet.
Yeah, but you know what?
In a place like this with people talking, I have that feature on this.
We'll just keep going.
Thank you.
Did Barbara came with the collection or the collection came with Barbara?
Because Barbara worked in the collection for 18 years.
What's the capacity of opportunity?
So, Chef Louis actually had a curator with a CEO of our collection.
Right.
Did you advise on purchases, sort of catalogs, all of the above?
Well, advising, we looked at catalogs together.
I would look and point something out.
And a lot of times, I would buy something on my own for my own collection and bring it in.
end up selling it to him or giving it to him because he didn't have it.
It did belong there, no question.
How did you come together?
She was a little girl that
She became a Dr. Dhabha.
She became a member of the family.
How did you decide what went here and what went to Iowa?
Basically, Iowa doesn't want anything but a cookbook.
I have an agreement with the chief at the end of Iowa.
And I think it was in the third or fourth year of our agreement that the Chief Liberia retired.
And we get a new Chief Liberia, a darling lovely lady.
And when we talked, and I said, well, next year, they will start to give you all the cooking magazines and all the menus.
That's here.
To Iowa.
That's our connection.
Then she said, well,
Actually, we would like to be very selective.
We would like to have your presidential autographs, but not the rest.
We would like to have your original steel engravings
and woodblocks up to the 19th century, to the 18th century, but no better.
And I said to her, you know, you kind of want to collect the cream,
and leave me the skim milk.
Sort of.
In a manner of speaking.
So we made a very, very amicable, friendly agreement that we stopped with the 22,000 croquants.
The starting start.
Yes, start.
Then since here, you see,
The whole idea of Iowa came up because in Chicago was a legendary Hungarian book finder, book designer family.
The Kner family, K-N-E-R, they've been working with books for five generations in Hungary.
generation.
The great grandparents of his brother and sister who lived in Chicago was a wandering Jew, a bookbinder who went from
castle to castle, from parish to parish, from church to church, and bind the books for the minister, for the priest, for the count, whoever had some books for binding.
Then the son opened a little bindery and started to print forms
for payments and bills.
Business forms.
The grandson started to print more.
And the great grandson made so much money on print business forms and other things that
As a laborer's love, he started to publish magnificent little books designed by the best book designers.
And he sent his children to the best schools to learn the art of book designing, the art of graphic design.
And these were the people who have been my friends in Chicago.
And the female member of the family who never get married, Elizabeth Nell, who was one of the foremost known bookbinders in Hungary.
who is still alive and is 94 or 95 year old kner unfortunately she is not in the best mental capacity but when you come to chicago i promise you if she is in that
Stage of mine in October I'll take you to that because you never sign anything like that and
She went in business with an Irish bookbinder who learned his trade in England.
And I heard a Kalapinus dictionary.
Kalapinus was a Jesuit.
who in the 1500s wrote a Latin dictionary on the 10 best known languages of that age, what being the 10 most important languages in 1590, which been, of course the dictionary was in Latin.
And he opened up every word was in love.
And it showed each word in Greek, in French, in German, in Spanish, in Hungarian, in English.
Two more languages.
And I have a copy of this book which was stolen from a castle by a Soviet soldier.
for its cover.
It had an early 18th century binding that the soldiers throw out and throw away the books.
This Elizabeth Kner rebounded for me so that it opened flat on every page.
But this is a book, a large folio size, printed in Switzerland in 1596.
And the Russian one is the cover?
the russian turkey probably it was not russian soviet soldier but that's what i said you know but anyhow that kind of strengthened my friendship with her partner whose name was william anthony bill anthony
And when Bill Anthony get a job as a book restorer at the University of Iowa, and the University of Iowa
yet as a present, the Martin collection, M-A-R-T-I-N, Dr. Martin, which is perhaps one of the best medical libraries in the United States.
Medical books from the late 1400s, early 1500s, early 1600s.
And then I saw that list, I realized
that I have many books written by the same authors as cookbooks, as he has medical books.
And I had, oh, I don't know, probably three dozen, four dozen books from 1475 till 1630 or so.
So I said, Bill, if you are there on the faculty as a book restorer, I'll give my books to the University of Iowa.
Couldn't be at a better place.
You know?
And it will make a terrific match with the Martin books.
And we have the best relationship on your will guide on cancer of the liver.
Last year.
and the chief librarian retired, and the new librarian.